How might we characterize the history of the Transatlantic slave trade and indigenous slavery from a Ghanaian perspective?
Drawing on the course readings, lectures and videos, what major argument or central claim can you make about the relationship between these systems?

+++ Letter to Dr Gallon
I've been working on my paper over the weekend, and although I've been less productive than I'd hoped, I think I have a solid foundation at the moment to build upon. I want to analyze the transition from a local slave tradition to a slave export economy and the larger impacts of slavery on the Gold Coast through the lens of Capitalism and Dialectical Materialism. I'll look at the transformations in local Economy, Society, and Political structures, and then also analyze the moral responsibility of Ghanaian slave traders through the lens of a new cash economy and the economic pressures put upon them by outside capital. I think Anowa has lots of symbolism that I can use to back up my claims about the effect of a new economic structure in the Gold Coast. I also want to use some Marxist writings to provide a framework with witch to structure my analysis. I know that Marxist commentary can be incredibly divisive, so I wanted to get some feedback from you about my use of "radical" ideological perspectives. I don't intend to write an ideologically motivated paper, and I want to hold myself to the highest academic standards, but I also want to explore the relationship between class structures and the Ghanaian slave economy.


--- The Introduction of Capitalism as the basis for the transatlantic slave trade in Ghana



+++ Slave Trade as the introduction of capitalism into west African culture.
    Back this up with citations of Anowa

    The Communist Manifesto speaks at length to the impact on the economy of industrialization and wage-labor. It speaks much less on entire nations caught up in the peripheries of the industrial revolution. Nations supplying the labor and raw materials for the industrial activities.

    Perhaps the notion of class struggle/warfare can be expanded to a macro scale and encompass whole nations. Perhaps the African colonies can be seen as a macro Proletariat nation, subservient to and within the bounds of a wage-slavery relationship with the Bourgeoisie European nations.

The average price of wage-labour is the minimum wage, i.e., that quantum of the means of subsistence which is absolutely requisite to keep the labourer in bare existence as a labourer. What, therefore, the wage-labourer appropriates by means of his labour, merely suffices to prolong and reproduce a bare existence. We by no means intend to abolish this personal appropriation of the products of labour, an appropriation that is made for the maintenance and reproduction of human life, and that leaves no surplus wherewith to command the labour of others. All that we want to do away with is the miserable character of this appropriation, under which the labourer lives merely to increase capital, and is allowed to live only in so far as the interest of the ruling class requires it. -- Communist Manifesto Page 24

But does wage-labour create any property for the labourer? Not a bit. It creates capital, i.e., that kind of property which exploits wage-labour, and which cannot increase except upon condition of begetting a new supply of wage-labour for fresh exploitation. -- Communist Manifesto Page 23

Thus an orderly production is ensured by reciprocity, redistribution, and house holding, rather than the principles of labour for remuneration, minimum effort, and the separation of economic institutions from political and social ones. -- Economic Forms of Pre-Colonial Ghana Page 35 (4)

to give the chief no more land than any other individual and to distribute land rights widely and more or less equally, so that there are democratic communities consisting of multitudes of small farmers or peasant proprietors of much the same social and economic status. The temporal lord scarcely exists on the West Coast, and there is no conception whatever of a landlord in the European sense. -- H. G. Jones The Earth Goddess, as cited in Economic Forms of Pre-Colonial Ghana Page 34 (3)

 - These sources seem to be a European projection onto Ghanaian society. They might contain inaccuracies introduced by the fantasies of the author, but they also seem to stab at truth. That Pre-Colonial (pre slave trade) Ghana did not have the class structure and land owning class that pre-capitalist (and contemporary) Europe had.

Of course this simplified presentation exaggerates the degree of equality and democracy attainable, and should not be taken as a literal description of actual economic conditions in Ghana. It is, however, a useful half-truth to contrast with the economic organization found in other countries, and with the economic structure that developed in connection with foreign trade. -- Economic Forms in Pre-Colonial Ghana Page 35 (4)

The result was that a large part of the economy was characterized by a household subsistence form of economic organization with a low degree of specialization and exchange, and a low level of material production. Each household was to a large degree an independent center for production and consumption carrying on a wide range of agricultural, service, and manufacturing activities. It grew most of its own food, built its own houses, furniture, and equipment, provided its own clothing, and in a sense contained an economy in itself. It cooperated on the village level with other households in activities such as defense, hunting, and sometimes house-building and land-clearing. Although some persons also specialized in varying degrees in religious, governmental, or manufacturing activities, within the village economy there there were full-time specialists and there was no elaborate division of labor. In an ordinary village, even the chief's family would typically supply its own food. -- Economic Forms in Pre-Colonial Ghana Page 36-37 (5-6)

However, the agricultural technology, for producing food surplus and freeing a significant portion of the population from agriculture, existed but was used in such a manner that each family spent, say one-third of its time on food production, instead of one family three doing this work full time. Output per man in agriculture was therefore low because each family needed only to produce its own consumption requirements. Production per acre was also low because 30 part-time workers will usually use more land than 10 full time workers. -- Economic Forms in Pre-Colonial Ghana Page 37 (6)

irrespective of any human or social considerations. In the Pre-Colonial Ghanaian economies, the use of slaves was considerably more temperate. Although slaves fared worse than free men, their standards of living were well above the minimum for bare subsistence. -- Economic Forms in Pre-Colonial Ghana Page 44 (13)

In the second half of the 17th century gun-running which followed the wake of the concentration of many European forts shook the foundations of (Cold Coast) society. The great proliferation of firearms made possible a forcible inclusion of other weaker states into the power complex. The later part of the 17th century, therefore, witnessed the formation of sizable empires in the hinterland of the coast. The desire for territorial expansion by force of arms in order to be economically viable in the new situation was first shown by Denkyira, to be followed by Akwamu and Ashanti. -- K. Y. Daaku as cited in Economic Forms in Pre-Colonial Ghana Page 44 (13)
1. K. Y. Daaku, Trade and Politics on the Cold Coast: 1640-1720, Unpublished Ph.D Thesis. London, 1964, p. 41.

Inasmuch as man is not productive, inasmuch as he is receptive and passive, he is nothing, he is dead. In this productive process, man realizes his own essence, he returns to his own essence, which in theological language is nothing other than his return to God. -- Fromm

"The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of production, by the immensely facilitated means of communication, draws all, even the most barbarian, nations into civilization. The cheap prices of commodities are the heavy artillery with which it batters down all Chinese walls, with which it forces the barbarians’ intensely obstinate hatred of foreigners to capitulate. It compels all nations, on pain of extinction, to adopt the bourgeois mode of production; it compels them to introduce what it calls civilization into their midst, i.e., to become bourgeois themselves. In one word, it creates a world after its own image." -- Communist Manifesto Page 13


The transatlantic slave trade and indigenous slavery in Ghana are reflections of the transition from a pre-capitalist economy to an intense capital driven export economy.

    We can use the lens of Dialectical Materialism to evaluate the changes in scocial, economic, and political structures within Ghana. Through this lens, we can better understand the dramatic impact that the slave trade had on Ghanain society. The transition from a domestic slave tradition to a capital driven slave export economy also becomes relevant and provides a structure within which to judge the complicity of local slave traders.

1. Introduction
1.1 Pre slave trade conditions in Ghanaian economies
    Previous to European economic influence, the


    analysis of the differences between European and Ghanain economies, specifically the absence of a land owning class hierarchy in Ghana (Bourgeoisie).
    A claim (thesis) that the introduction of the slave trade created an economic incentive that created a Bourgeoisie class within Ghanaian society, the Ghanaian slave traders.
    This is Anowa! She has become part of the new Bourgeoisie class and no longer knows her place within Ghanaian society.

2. Transformations of local economy
    The foundation of local economies previously relied of sustenance agriculture

    The creation of a cash economy also enabled the creation of debt. Debt became a tool with which to enslave the poorest members of society. Debt represented the power of the Bourgeoisie

3. Transformations of local society

4. Transformations of local Political structures

5. Local responsibility.
    The unyielding pressure of outside capital in the form of weapons and manufactured goods created an inescapable economic structure that created a Bourgeoisie class of local Ghanaian slavers. This new economic class within society was a fabrication of European influence.
    Political Structures were warped by the flood of foreign capital and began to incentivize wars of aggression for the purpose of slave capture between Ghanaian nations.




I expect you to support your assertions and arguments with evidence obtained from the class readings. Do try to use many of the materials (primary and secondary sources) that we have examined over the past weeks.
Your paper should be approximately four to five double-spaced pages in length. Your font must be 12 points. Please use Chicago Style (end-notes or footnotes) to cite your sources. Again, you must back up your claims with evidence. Please include a “Works Cited” page at the end of your paper.

